David Schaich (he): All right, that should be the recording in progress.
David Schaich (he): We'll get under way on another Monday morning.
David Schaich (he): Funny how
David Schaich (he): the focus is out...
David Schaich (he): I was just going to say it felt
David Schaich (he): very chilly to me this morning aftre a mild weekend.
David Schaich (he): Maybe just
David Schaich (he): my psychology. But let's
David Schaich (he): quickly get going with the six-digit code for today: 2 2 1
David Schaich (he): 6 7 0.
David Schaich (he): And a quick reminder of what we got through last Tuesday. It's been a while now
David Schaich (he): since we looked at two fairly central results from probability theory that
David Schaich (he): go a long way to explaining the power of statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): Law of large numbers. We expressed as the statement that the arithmetic mean of
David Schaich (he): some outcome in our outcome set from the experiment that is repeated
David Schaich (he): some large number of times. The capital are each experiment. It's approximately the mean of the corresponding probability space for which these
David Schaich (he): experiments are drawn or defined.
David Schaich (he): at least that approximation becomes
David Schaich (he): better and better for the large number of repetitions.
David Schaich (he): and are much greater than one. and they similar
David Schaich (he): by any other.
David Schaich (he): The central.
David Schaich (he): the links, the collective behavior in the form of the probability distribution
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): some coordinate that depends on a large number of identical and identical or independence, and identically distributed
David Schaich (he): random numbers.
David Schaich (he): This probability distribution is expressed simply as the Gaussian function
David Schaich (he): that it depends
David Schaich (he): on the
David Schaich (he): mean and variance you and Sigma Square
David Schaich (he): of each individual
David Schaich (he): degree of free. Let me train a variable or
David Schaich (he): repetition of the experiments in question.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): this is a deceptively powerful
David Schaich (he): result that we can get
David Schaich (he): information about the large scale behavior of many particles, just from the defining features of a single one, and the probability distribution that governs it, its behavior.
David Schaich (he): or with that me
David Schaich (he): you and variance Sigma squared
David Schaich (he): just for a single degree of freedom.
David Schaich (he): So are there any
David Schaich (he): questions about that before we go ahead.
David Schaich (he): The plan for
David Schaich (he): this week.
David Schaich (he): So today
David Schaich (he): i'll be looking at that, you know. Bring the walks and a fusion. and this will look
David Schaich (he): quite similar to the tutorial activity we had on Thursday.
David Schaich (he): which turns out we can interpret as a particular random walk. We'll generalize that today and connect that
David Schaich (he): to the central limit theorem.
David Schaich (he): and quite possibly then move on to
David Schaich (he): concepts of statistical ensembles. and the more dynamic equilibrium depending on how things go.
David Schaich (he): And then tomorrow rather than another lesson with the tutorial. On Thursday
David Schaich (he): we switch over to a computer lab an opportunity for you to work on that computer project, and we'll spend at least some of the time tomorrow, talking through some of the background information in that project.
David Schaich (he): as well as some of the basics of Python, just for the benefit of those of you who
David Schaich (he): are not coming into this with a background in programming which you don't need to.
David Schaich (he): So, starting off with
David Schaich (he): the idea of a random walk.
David Schaich (he): This is
David Schaich (he): hey. deceptively general and powerful
David Schaich (he): modeling tool, and I may have mentioned last week that it
David Schaich (he): is essentially what's going on in rounding in motion
David Schaich (he): mentioned is for the definitive proof that as the molecules exist. as well as
David Schaich (he): various other applications in
David Schaich (he): various different spaces, so the tutorial activity With that
David Schaich (he): game could be considered a random walk in money space.
David Schaich (he): the process of genetic drift. It's a random walk in the space of DNA sequences
David Schaich (he): and stock prices have elements of
David Schaich (he): we in the walks
David Schaich (he): in more financial contexts, which
David Schaich (he): some of you may well have seen depending on what modules you've taken from this department.
David Schaich (he): Basic idea is, we have some objects.
David Schaich (he): and at points in time this object
David Schaich (he): takes
David Schaich (he): some step. It has it changes in some way at this position on their property
David Schaich (he): with some. I wanted to brandon this.
David Schaich (he): So if we talk just
David Schaich (he): and so we have an object that is indeed stepping in physical space. It starts from
David Schaich (he): a current position.
David Schaich (he): and from that position that ran step takes it to
David Schaich (he): some new position, or, more generally, these positions can be
David Schaich (he): state
David Schaich (he): in Asia
David Schaich (he): abstract space.
David Schaich (he): This.
David Schaich (he): I should say, just in passing, is an example of what is called
David Schaich (he): i'm. More off process.
David Schaich (he): which is, that
David Schaich (he): the behavior of the object. The step that it takes
David Schaich (he): depends only on that it's or connects only its current position to its new position. So it starts from some States
David Schaich (he): takes a random step to a new State.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): the yeah
David Schaich (he): absence of any memory effects is sort of the defining feature of a Markov process.
David Schaich (he): The evolution of a State, from its current value to its new position.
David Schaich (he): depends only on
David Schaich (he): this single random step, and the sequence of states or positions
David Schaich (he): that's comes out of this process is known as
David Schaich (he): a Markov chain.
David Schaich (he): the idea being that each states in this chain is only linked to the one that came immediately before the one that comes to the after, with
David Schaich (he): no need to
David Schaich (he): account for or no ability to incorporate any information about
David Schaich (he): the past history. Oh. the system.
David Schaich (he): and this is something that we will come back around to toward the end of the module. In the 10
David Schaich (he): we'll look at Markov chains in more detail, which is
David Schaich (he): the main motivation for mentioning the here
David Schaich (he): going to some details about random loss
David Schaich (he): specialized to
David Schaich (he): just a simple example of that may be able to recognize as a slight generalization of
David Schaich (he): that roulette game you look at in this tutorial. We'll make 3 simplifying assumptions
David Schaich (he): for the random walk. First, that
David Schaich (he): you will actually have something walking just
David Schaich (he): in one dimension. So a an object, a walker that can step either
David Schaich (he): to the right online. we'll call that
David Schaich (he): the positive direction.
David Schaich (he): and this step to the right.
David Schaich (he): or alternately, the water can
David Schaich (he): take a step to the left.
David Schaich (he): These the only 2 possibilities. the probability for
David Schaich (he): walking to the
David Schaich (he): left.
David Schaich (he): Q. Has to be one minus P. So that the probabilities for those.
David Schaich (he): the sum of the probabilities over all possible steps as up to a 100% as probabilities. Most
David Schaich (he): without loss of generality, we can
David Schaich (he): well.
David Schaich (he): with some loss of generality we will fix the length of each step
David Schaich (he): that the water takes in this
David Schaich (he): one dimension. Stepping out it to the right, we're left with that. In generality we can fix the value
David Schaich (he): of that fixed step like just to be one equivalent to working in units of
David Schaich (he): steps.
David Schaich (he): going to the left or the right and the file simplification.
David Schaich (he): We'll see that each step
David Schaich (he): occurs at a regular time
David Schaich (he): interval. Call that delta t.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): taking n steps in this walk will last some total time n times delta t.
David Schaich (he): So this
David Schaich (he): before going on to
David Schaich (he): deal with this example. I'll just say some of the ways we can appreciate. This is
David Schaich (he): simplifying. This is, if we think about Brownian motion that was eventually explained as a random walk of, say, a polling grain being bombarded by lots of water molecules in the fluid.
David Schaich (he): Each of the steps in that
David Schaich (he): that Brownian motion is resulting from some collision between
David Schaich (he): a water molecule H. Twoo, and that pollen grain. Those are occurring at unpredictable times.
David Schaich (he): direct and unpredictable directions in the 2 dimensions
David Schaich (he): that that motion is pursuing, and the length that the polygrade is going to step from each of those collisions is going to
David Schaich (he): randomly fluctuates.
David Schaich (he): depending on
yeah
David Schaich (he): speed and angle with which the water molecule can large it. So
David Schaich (he): all 3 0f these
David Schaich (he): simplifications are lost. In that case, just why you need someone like I assign to to carry out the mathematics and actually predict
David Schaich (he): the observed behavior of Brownian motion model as this sort of random walk
but
David Schaich (he): one, that representative. What that we could consider
David Schaich (he): with our simplifying setup is.
David Schaich (he): say, step, step once to the left.
David Schaich (he): for all this represents this in.
David Schaich (he): and the stepping again. the right. left, right, and then maybe a couple of more steps to the right.
David Schaich (he): So if we
David Schaich (he): just count the number of steps in this walk we have n equals 6, and after stepping
David Schaich (he): left, right, left, right, right, right, with fixed step, lengths
David Schaich (he): the you step to the left, followed by the step to the right takes us back to the starting point.
David Schaich (he): We can just call X equals 0.
David Schaich (he): Repeat that left and right, and then the 2 steps to the right can take us to a final position.
David Schaich (he): X equals
David Schaich (he): plus 2, so the step to the right
David Schaich (he): is plus
David Schaich (he): step to the left is minus one. I'm. A physician
David Schaich (he): next equals 2 from
David Schaich (he): defining the starting position to be 0.
David Schaich (he): So if we we were to
David Schaich (he): let's do that same.
David Schaich (he): what in the opposite direction.
David Schaich (he): and we will get to X of negative 2 negative numbers just indicating that we're to the left of the starting position rather than the right. and we can
David Schaich (he): just quickly toss out the basic probability features of
David Schaich (he): this walk. So
David Schaich (he): similarly to what we look at in the tutorial, I'll ask you how many.
David Schaich (he): what's are there
David Schaich (he): all possible? It works with
David Schaich (he): this number of step, 6
David Schaich (he): simplifications that
David Schaich (he): you put in place 20 license.
David Schaich (he): I see some calculations being done. shout out what they are seeing.
David Schaich (he): Let's break it down. Then, for
David Schaich (he): each of the steps that we take, there are
David Schaich (he): 2 possible directions to go to the left or to the right. So with that first step
David Schaich (he): there are 2 possible walks with a single step.
David Schaich (he): let me take the next step. It's independent of the one that came before. So there's another 2 possibilities going forward
right?
David Schaich (he): And that continues for
David Schaich (he): the 10 steps that we take. You're 6,
David Schaich (he): which 248-16-3264.
David Schaich (he): It's a 64 possible steps.
David Schaich (he): and you can talk about now, the probability of
David Schaich (he): any particular
David Schaich (he): step with the represent any any particular walk like a representative one that
David Schaich (he): we just wrote down
David Schaich (he): Anyone have.
David Schaich (he): I guess, as to
David Schaich (he): what the probability for this particular
David Schaich (he): six-step walk is out of all of the possible 6 step walks, and 64 that we
David Schaich (he): just counting that.
Well.
David Schaich (he): it is one over 64, if and only if the probability of stepping to the right is the same. It's probably going to accept me to the left. Q. Equals a half
David Schaich (he): in the more general case, that is still more general than
David Schaich (he): it could be. You know we simplify things. We still have this
David Schaich (he): free of this varying, freely varying probability. P. And Q. For stepping to the right and stepping to the left
with each step to be left.
David Schaich (he): You said that that occurs with the probability of queue.
David Schaich (he): he. for each step to the right. So the overall probability for
David Schaich (he): this step with Sorry, this walk, with 4 steps to be right and 2 to the left, as well 4 factors of probably for stepping right.
David Schaich (he): followed by
David Schaich (he): along with 2 factors of the probability queue for step into the left.
David Schaich (he): and it's plugging in.
David Schaich (he): I have 40 to those gives one over, 2 to the 6 0ne over 64.
David Schaich (he): But you know more. General, set up. This need not be
David Schaich (he): the same, for all walks in a particular
David Schaich (he): at opposite walk, he's going to have
David Schaich (he): the opposite factors of P. And Q. Reducing the that same one over 64,
David Schaich (he): when the probability of stepping in each direction is equal.
David Schaich (he): But more generally
David Schaich (he): these are, our probability sets
David Schaich (he): could differ.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): okay.
David Schaich (he): generic probability
David Schaich (he): 4.
David Schaich (he): And in stuff walk
if they
David Schaich (he): lowercase our steps
David Schaich (he): to the right.
David Schaich (he): So this our here stands for hopefully won't be confused with the earlier our we had for repetition.
David Schaich (he): you know we have. and minus our
David Schaich (he): steps to the left.
David Schaich (he): So you
David Schaich (he): probability for our step
is
David Schaich (he): our powers of P.
David Schaich (he): If you're on
the is a power in that
David Schaich (he): the label that we have. or politicians last week.
David Schaich (he): that 2, how is it? And minus our the cover, will be stepping right and left with each of those r and and minus our
David Schaich (he): steps.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): continuing with the system and steps
David Schaich (he): in total, with R to the right and minus art and left.
David Schaich (he): What we will be interested in
David Schaich (he): computing
David Schaich (he): is the
David Schaich (he): expectation, value or just the expected
David Schaich (he): final position
David Schaich (he): for the walker after
David Schaich (he): the schedule completes expectation value for that X,
David Schaich (he): as well as
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): analog of the variance. I try to reserve that term, for
David Schaich (he): It's a single step process, with the
David Schaich (he): difference between
David Schaich (he): this expectation value of the square, of the final position
and the square of the expectation value of the final position.
David Schaich (he): This gives
David Schaich (he): some measure of the fluctuations that we could expect
David Schaich (he): around the final position of a walk if we were to repeat that walk many times, all starting from the same starting point, and with the same probabilities which is relevant if we consider many particles
David Schaich (he): and say that
David Schaich (he): behavior, each particle is being considered a repetition.
David Schaich (he): All that the process that each single one is going under, so
David Schaich (he): any particles undergoing many random walks.
David Schaich (he): I'll be interested both in the expected final position of all those particles, as well as how much each individual.
David Schaich (he): they will fluctuate around that expectation.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): building on what we saw above
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): it's the final position of
David Schaich (he): these end. Step walks with and steps to the right
David Schaich (he): is just going to be
the
David Schaich (he): displacement that we take to the right each of those
David Schaich (he): our steps out of the total in
David Schaich (he): plus the negative one displacements to the right.
David Schaich (he): with the remaining and minus ourselves.
David Schaich (he): which is 2 R. Minus n.
which.
David Schaich (he): because our itself
David Schaich (he): can only range from 0 to N. Either we
David Schaich (he): take all steps to the left. We take all steps to the right, or we have something
in the middle. Yes.
David Schaich (he): the stress. the range of final positions that we can have for a given number of steps.
David Schaich (he): and because we have fixed the the size of each step to be the same, plus and minus one.
David Schaich (he): We can equivalent later.
David Schaich (he): Talk about either the probability of ending up at a particular
David Schaich (he): I know position
David Schaich (he): or the probability. Oh.
David Schaich (he): taking ourselves out of this, and
David Schaich (he): by Sh!
David Schaich (he): I will take advantage of this here and now to we focus on
David Schaich (he): P. Of R, which is a bit easier to handle along the lines of what we did last week.
David Schaich (he): I will built
at this only holds
David Schaich (he): because of our
David Schaich (he): 50 step. Size
David Schaich (he): is fixed, and we've set it t0 0ne.
David Schaich (he): This is not
David Schaich (he): for some distribution.
David Schaich (he): Let's see what I can have on the projector at the same time. So
David Schaich (he): because
David Schaich (he): the final position
David Schaich (he): isn't sensitive to the order
David Schaich (he): which the steps are taken. There are
David Schaich (he): depending on what that final position is various different numbers of ways to
David Schaich (he): reach it.
This just one example. To
David Schaich (he): illustrate this.
David Schaich (he): let me ask you
David Schaich (he): if we have those same 6 6 steps that we started off with.
David Schaich (he): How many ways would there be to reach that final position.
David Schaich (he): X equals 4 from 6 step walks.
Thanks.
David Schaich (he): That is exactly the number that there are in the
David Schaich (he): easy way to see that is
David Schaich (he): by changing that variable from the final position X.
David Schaich (he): That number of steps to the right that we would need
to get to X equals 4.
David Schaich (he): Rearranging this relation
David Schaich (he): we have.
David Schaich (he): and our is one half
of the sum
David Schaich (he): of X and N. In this case 4 plus 6 is 10 0ver, 2 is 5.
David Schaich (he): S0 0ut of a 6 step walk we need 5 steps to the right. and there are
David Schaich (he): 6 ways to do that.
David Schaich (he): and that can either be the first step, or the second step
David Schaich (he): on the third step, and s0 0n.
David Schaich (he): 3 6.
David Schaich (he): Here
David Schaich (he): it's coming from the corresponding binomial coefficients, 6 choose 5,
David Schaich (he): which in general
David Schaich (he): is the total number of steps, and choosing
David Schaich (he): the number of steps are to the right.
David Schaich (he): So with
David Schaich (he): that's factor for the number of possible ways to end up at X equals 4,
David Schaich (he): the overall probability, 4 0r 6 that walk to end up in X equals 4, which is equal.
The probability of taking it
David Schaich (he): 5 steps to the right. we have the probability of stepping to the right risk. In the fifth hour we have the probability of step into the left just once.
David Schaich (he): Then we have 6 possible permutations of those steps that all needs to be accounted for.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): general probability piece of R.
David Schaich (he): It's just expressed in terms of
David Schaich (he): multiply it by
yes.
David Schaich (he): probability we had earlier for a single instead walk
David Schaich (he): with our steps to the right.
David Schaich (he): So with that
David Schaich (he): example clarifying things you can. Shelby, and and look at the expected value for that final position which
David Schaich (he): the definition of expectation value we had last week. We know
David Schaich (he): this is some
David Schaich (he): over all possible file positions that we have as outcomes in our outcome sets
David Schaich (he): of that final position waited by the final position itself. Yeah, the thanks to you. connection between the final position and the number of steps to the right.
David Schaich (he): You can
David Schaich (he): recast this as the sum over all possible number of steps to the right from 0 to end for an instant. Walk
David Schaich (he): Hex is t0 0ur minus n. and then the probability taking our steps to the right.
David Schaich (he): the sum is up in your operation.
Yes.
David Schaich (he): which is why the expectation volume as a whole is. and pull out
David Schaich (he): a factor of 2 at the sum of our times.
David Schaich (he): P. Of R.
You
David Schaich (he): value of all the times. Probability for
David Schaich (he): each possible outcome in the set gives the expectation value.
David Schaich (he): Oh. the or the expected value of the number of steps that we take for the right. it will be only that factor of minus N. Out of the sum we just have the sum over all the probabilities, which, because they are probabilities.
David Schaich (he): just add up t0 0ne.
David Schaich (he): I can totally
David Schaich (he): the the expected value
David Schaich (he): of the square of the final position. 2
David Schaich (he): expressions
David Schaich (he): related to the number of steps to the right. You just have to square the X that shows up in the sum
David Schaich (he): and expanding that we have
David Schaich (he): account of 4 times r squared
David Schaich (he): within my piece of our
yeah
David Schaich (he): constant value of the constant factor minus 4 n that comes out of the sum.
David Schaich (he): It's an all if you are just giving the expectation down just to all. and then
David Schaich (he): a plus n squared at the end.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): our goal of
David Schaich (he): analyzing the final position and the fluctuations of these random walks, has now
David Schaich (he): computing the expectation values of R. And R. Squared
David Schaich (he): the number of steps to the right, out of total
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): useful trick. To do what
David Schaich (he): this sort of thing which you may have seen previously
David Schaich (he): is. you find what's known as a generating function which is called that because it generates these
David Schaich (he): these targets, the expectation values of our to some power
David Schaich (he): is this
David Schaich (he): something that sounds familiar, or something that's brand new
David Schaich (he): shaking heads means
David Schaich (he): you, I suspect. So let's go through this.
David Schaich (he): It's some share
David Schaich (he): generating function
David Schaich (he): will be a function of this parameter Pheno.
and
David Schaich (he): it will involve
David Schaich (he): the sum over. All possible steps to the right are from 0 to N.
David Schaich (he): It will involve the probability.
David Schaich (he): Stepping to the right.
David Schaich (he): as we should expect. We're looking at expectation values of our.
David Schaich (he): And then what goes in that? Some
David Schaich (he): is the exponential of our times data.
David Schaich (he): So this is
David Schaich (he): chosen so that when we set
David Schaich (he): this new parameter the t0 0,
David Schaich (he): we get
David Schaich (he): useful and interesting results.
David Schaich (he): If we just look at the generating function itself.
David Schaich (he): t of theta equals 0. One shout out what that would be equal to
David Schaich (he): it is one we have.
David Schaich (he): The sum over
David Schaich (he): E to the 0 is one times the probabilities is the sub over capabilities which add up to a 100%.
David Schaich (he): What is useful is when we work at the derivative
David Schaich (he): we're more useful than recovering 100%
David Schaich (he): behavior required by probability
David Schaich (he): and probability distributions. When we look at the derivatives
David Schaich (he): of this generating function, and after taking the derivative
David Schaich (he): set, the t0 0. Well, the sum is, the linear operation derivative can go inside that
David Schaich (he): the derivative of even the art theater, with respect to Theta just bring this down. In fact, there are
David Schaich (he): left as it was. Pr. Is independence of, theta and then setting theta t0 0
David Schaich (he): sets all of those exponential factors t0 0ne. So we get the sum over R. How it's our weighted by the probability
alright.
David Schaich (he): definition of the expectation value of our
David Schaich (he): and this can be repeated
David Schaich (he): some end number of times.
David Schaich (he): you know. to the
David Schaich (he): Take n derivatives
David Schaich (he): of the generating function
David Schaich (he): with every derivative data is only showing up in the exponential factor. So we bring down our powers of end
David Schaich (he): to see you
David Schaich (he): original expression in the some remaining.
David Schaich (he): and we end up with the expectation value
David Schaich (he): of our to the power. And
David Schaich (he): so in the particular.
David Schaich (he): the simple random walk that we're considering walking in one dimension
David Schaich (he): with a fixed step length.
David Schaich (he): Our generating function
David Schaich (he): just involves the general probability piece of our that'd be computed here minutes to go
David Schaich (he): My
times.
David Schaich (he): He powers the probability to step to the right of the Times, and then
David Schaich (he): and minus our powers of the probability queue to step to the left
David Schaich (he): If we
David Schaich (he): rearrange this. they suggested what.
David Schaich (he): collecting together the 2 factors E to the theta and P. That are all raised to the our power.
David Schaich (he): You have to be in line with all the left over.
David Schaich (he): and the sum over R from one to N.
David Schaich (he): We can recognize or convince ourselves after the fact
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): this is just the sum e to the theta times p. Plus Q. Raised to the as power.
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): the these powers of binomials are where binomial coefficients were originally
David Schaich (he): identified and discovered many centuries ago.
David Schaich (he): This is
David Schaich (he): it's based on the
David Schaich (he): I know your formula.
David Schaich (he): and plus b the end. It's the sum over I and she's I
David Schaich (he): on the projector.
David Schaich (he): So it's easy to check again that
David Schaich (he): t of 0 is not just p plus Q. To the power in
David Schaich (he): this, Into the theatre it comes. One p plus Q. We know, is one.
David Schaich (he): You know how we're in remains one.
David Schaich (he): and
she's a
David Schaich (he): simple generating function to take derivatives.
David Schaich (he): Oh.
David Schaich (he): taking that derivative of
David Schaich (he): we have n minus one powers.
Oh.
David Schaich (he): I know we're meeting.
David Schaich (he): I know the chain rule looks that
the
David Schaich (he): derivative of the binomial itself, with respect to theta
David Schaich (he): which is just. you do the you know times that costing factor. P:
David Schaich (he): We set it t0 0.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. this
David Schaich (he): whole binomial goes away again becomes one reason power n minus one.
David Schaich (he): We have n times one times one.
David Schaich (he): P. We have identified that as the expectation value.
David Schaich (he): this R. The number of steps to the right given me.
David Schaich (he): Probably this is P. And Q. That we have governing this random walk.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): second, derivative to get the expectation value r squared
David Schaich (he): is not much harder.
David Schaich (he): You can just start from the first derivative that we have.
David Schaich (he): and take another derivative of that.
David Schaich (he): It's the easy
David Schaich (he): way to start this with the derivative of the theta which is just. You do the theta
David Schaich (he): So this first term
David Schaich (he): I actually rearrange things slightly
David Schaich (he): up to the front
David Schaich (he): N. Minus one power that we need
David Schaich (he): from the product rule derivatives to the
David Schaich (he): derivative of that I know what we have.
David Schaich (he): and n times the minus one
David Schaich (he): just raised to the N. Minus 2 power, and we have another
you to the theater
David Schaich (he): he brought down
David Schaich (he): from that.
David Schaich (he): And we're setting the t0 0
David Schaich (he): in all of these terms. which simplifies things dramatically. How is that
David Schaich (he): becomes one and one. So when N. Times P. Is left.
David Schaich (he): the second term we have.
David Schaich (he): and then we have and minus one yeah
David Schaich (he): times, one times P. Times one plus one times. P. Again.
David Schaich (he): So n times n minus one times P. Squared overall.
David Schaich (he): which rearrange by it. pulling out an overall factor of and Mp. You have one
David Schaich (he): plus
David Schaich (he): a minus one times P. Or Np.
David Schaich (he): Minus P.
David Schaich (he): And because one minus P. Equals Q.
David Schaich (he): Can be written in this way.
David Schaich (he): overall factor of N. Times. P. Times the sum of Np. Plus Q. And that. you know, phone
David Schaich (he): our work with the introducing, generating function
David Schaich (he): is the expectation value of R squared.
So
David Schaich (he): we are now ready to get a final result. The expected final position
David Schaich (he): was twice the expected number of steps to provide
David Schaich (he): minus N.
See that
David Schaich (he): expected that number of steps to the right was just N. Times P.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): 2 Np. Minus N.
David Schaich (he): Can be written as N. Times
David Schaich (he): the real factor of 2 P. Minus one
David Schaich (he): the fluctuations around this final position you can buy it.
David Schaich (he): The difference between the expected value to the square, the expected value of the square, minus the square of the expected value.
David Schaich (he): We have that
David Schaich (he): expectation. Value of X squared was
David Schaich (he): 4 times the expected value of R squared.
David Schaich (he): Go ahead and rewrite that expression. Here i'll be back and forth.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): the square of the expectation Wx was that
David Schaich (he): t0 0ur
David Schaich (he): minus N. Square. So we are going to have
David Schaich (he): expanding this to
David Schaich (he): for r squared minus 4 in
David Schaich (he): plus n squared if they have mine assigned.
David Schaich (he): See those cancel out.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the minus 4 in our cancel out.
David Schaich (he): We are left with
David Schaich (he): 4 factors of
David Schaich (he): the expectation value of R squared
David Schaich (he): minus from here the the patient value
David Schaich (he): all right.
David Schaich (he): So the fluctuations and off the screen fluctuations in that's just related to the fluctuations in our
David Schaich (he): and plugging in what we computed for
David Schaich (he): these expectation values from the generating function we have
back to the 4
David Schaich (he): times.
David Schaich (he): Let me just distribute that product around
David Schaich (he): n squared p squared
David Schaich (he): plus Mp. Queue
David Schaich (he): the expectation value r squared.
David Schaich (he): It's attracting the square the expectation that we
David Schaich (he): squaring that cancel that you end up with
David Schaich (he): for Np. Queue of the fluctuations
David Schaich (he): of our walk around It's expected final position.
David Schaich (he): and just to
David Schaich (he): check Dennis.
David Schaich (he): These
David Schaich (he): results are sensible.
David Schaich (he): We can consider some limiting cases.
David Schaich (he): so we
David Schaich (he): look at the value for the probability of
David Schaich (he): of 0. That means that we have
David Schaich (he): no chance of taking a step to be right. Every single step has to be taken to the left.
David Schaich (he): Our expression for the
David Schaich (he): expected final position X with P equals 0 is just minus N. Which is consistent with all of the steps being taken to the left
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): fluctuations around the final position
David Schaich (he): when P equals 0. Yes. also an easy one. Fluctuations are 0, which also makes sense.
David Schaich (he): That's with the 100% probability of taking every step to the left. There's
David Schaich (he): no way that conceptually it's probabilistically. Every single time. Repeat this more.
David Schaich (he): you get exactly that same results for the final position. And
David Schaich (he): similarly, in the other extreme. When we have a 100% chance of taking this, taking every step to the right.
David Schaich (he): no chance of taking steps to the left.
David Schaich (he): ours. file position and times
David Schaich (he): on a position here and times 2 minus one
David Schaich (he): is, you know, positive, and we have no Q. One equals 0.
David Schaich (he): So the fluctuations are still 0,
David Schaich (he): and and also check that middle case. There's an equal probability of stepping to the right and left. and then equal, probably for all
David Schaich (he): to the end walks that we would have
David Schaich (he): the expected final value.
David Schaich (he): Well, 2 times a half is one minus 1 0,
David Schaich (he): and then the fluctuations now become non-zero.
David Schaich (he): both P. And Q. Equal a half.
David Schaich (he): Multiply them together. They are a quarter
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the expected value.
David Schaich (he): I
David Schaich (he): the fluctuations is just n.
David Schaich (he): Even though we can expect
David Schaich (he): any given wall to have it's highest probability. It's expected value for a final position of 0 and the starting point.
David Schaich (he): and there's an equal probability of second to the left, into the right. The more steps that we take, the more these walks are able to spread out.
David Schaich (he): or the fuse a random that
David Schaich (he): expected final position. So this is a simple example of what turns out to be
a very general result. Let me see
David Schaich (he): law of diffusion, which
David Schaich (he): I think it an eye on the clock we should pick up after a brief break at the top of the hour. S0 0ther questions about
David Schaich (he): the simple random walk that we've
David Schaich (he): gone through the first half of today.
David Schaich (he): I'll pause. The recording, then give you some time to consider it, or to
David Schaich (he): the recording is resumed as well, and
David Schaich (he): we have.
Yeah.
David Schaich (he): you get the key to random walks.
David Schaich (he): which is the to
David Schaich (he): this concept of diffusion. I was saying this before the break about how the fluctuations of many walks around the expected value
David Schaich (he): depend on the number of steps in the walk.
David Schaich (he): So, even though
David Schaich (he): there is a particular expected value As that walk is repeated. the different outcomes will spread out, or the fuse around that expected value.
David Schaich (he): So this is indeed just the same sort of behavior that we saw it very beginning on the module.
David Schaich (he): describing that error of time back last week.
David Schaich (he): How
David Schaich (he): each of these molecules of dye are randomly walking through the beaker.
spreading out their expected position or the fusing.
David Schaich (he): It's all actually. they become constrained by the total amount of
David Schaich (he): volume available.
David Schaich (he): So i' to
David Schaich (he): approach to fusion and generalize the result that we had, for simple example, of a one-dimensional random walk with
David Schaich (he): fixed steps and fixed intervals.
David Schaich (he): is to
David Schaich (he): go back t0 0ur final expression for
David Schaich (he): the expected value of the final position of the walk. and for the fluctuations around it. and
David Schaich (he): this to the
David Schaich (he): full time that
David Schaich (he): this lock required to take those end steps. So, with a fixed time interval between each step
David Schaich (he): we have the for the number of steps is that total time
David Schaich (he): divided by the time interval.
David Schaich (he): and then the expected final position
David Schaich (he): be expressed.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): A way. That depends on the time.
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): which we can define as a so-called drift philosophy. You know.
David Schaich (he): times the time that passes.
David Schaich (he): So in words, this
David Schaich (he): expected final position
David Schaich (he): use drifting
David Schaich (he): and it drifts with it.
David Schaich (he): The velocity
David Schaich (he): it is just
David Schaich (he): yeah expected length of the walk.
David Schaich (he): You find it by time. It is for any velocity
David Schaich (he): we can do something similar for
David Schaich (he): fluctuations.
David Schaich (he): We have from here that those fluctuations are 4 times Mp. Queue.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Number of steps is now again the total time divided by the time interval for each step
David Schaich (he): P. And Q.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): again, something that
David Schaich (he): grows linearly with the tile
David Schaich (he): just there. So you probably
David Schaich (he): it grows linearly with the number of steps that we solve for
David Schaich (he): our simple example
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): defining these fluctuations. the the square of some Delta X.
David Schaich (he): Let me see
David Schaich (he): diffusion, length.
David Schaich (he): or alternately, the uncertainty in that final position. X.
David Schaich (he): This result is
David Schaich (he): a particular example of so called wall of the fusion.
David Schaich (he): the state that
David Schaich (he): this diffusion, length, Delta X
David Schaich (he): is proportional
David Schaich (he): to the square root of the time that passes is
David Schaich (he): the particles in question are allowed to
David Schaich (he): walk and allowed to diffuse through that process of around the walk.
David Schaich (he): In a particular. the concept of proportionality and call the I will see
David Schaich (he): confusion constant.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): the the
David Schaich (he): scale of fluctuations
David Schaich (he): we have
David Schaich (he): in the particular process we are considering, so
David Schaich (he): looks a bit better. And focus now
David Schaich (he): with you
David Schaich (he): simple one-dimensional
David Schaich (he): that we use to get at these very general results.
David Schaich (he): We have the velocity
David Schaich (he): that is
David Schaich (he): Gp minus one
David Schaich (he): over that time interval which, without loss of generality, we can set the time interval to be one working units of
David Schaich (he): all steps. I'll leave it there for now. yeah, put in that the diffusion. Constance.
He's
David Schaich (he): that's square root of 4 Pq.
David Schaich (he): Over the time interval
David Schaich (he): we can get back to the limiting cases that we check just before the break, when either of P. Or Q. Are 0,
David Schaich (he): when all of the steps are in one or the other direction, with a 100% probability.
David Schaich (he): Then we saw that the fluctuations
David Schaich (he): and to vanish and correspondingly D. Vanishes as well, and it is maximized.
David Schaich (he): when P. Is equal to Q. With a 100%
David Schaich (he): yeah process of
David Schaich (he): spreading out or the fusion.
David Schaich (he): We had. Look at these
David Schaich (he): examples in a bit more
David Schaich (he): visual detail.
David Schaich (he): So if we start off good.
David Schaich (he): But I just mentioned the case of maximum diffusion.
David Schaich (he): I need to zoom out
David Schaich (he): to get this on the graph. I'm sorry to get this on the projector.
David Schaich (he): So what we have here
it is that case
David Schaich (he): A. P.
David Schaich (he): And Q. Equal to each other. equal t0 100. The drift velocity was proportional t0 2 P. Minus one. So there is
David Schaich (he): no drift in this random walk. but the
David Schaich (he): diffusion constant is 2 times
David Schaich (he): the square root of the half squared. s0 2 times a half is one.
David Schaich (he): All that is left is that one over Route
David Schaich (he): delta T. The time interval which we can take to be one without loss of generality.
David Schaich (he): The curves on this plot are for a probability distribution.
David Schaich (he): The one coming from the central limit theorem for
David Schaich (he): this random walk with P. Equals. Q equals a half.
David Schaich (he): and as time goes on you can see that the
David Schaich (he): expected position for each of these walks
David Schaich (he): always remains right at the start of a position X equals 0.
David Schaich (he): I'll note that the
David Schaich (he): maximum of the scaption probability distribution is it X equals 0, the ex, the expectation value or expected value.
David Schaich (he): It's different from that maximum, but turns out
David Schaich (he): for the caption distribution to the
David Schaich (he): obviously related to it. Thanks to the reflection, symmetry
David Schaich (he): around the central point in the caption.
David Schaich (he): So we have that so
David Schaich (he): fixed expectation value on X equals 0, that we found
David Schaich (he): just from our analytic expressions for
this
David Schaich (he): this quality of the file position. But we also see that as time passes
David Schaich (he): where time is going from one t0 10,
David Schaich (he): the probability, distribution.
David Schaich (he): or the scale of fluctuations around that expected central value of 0
David Schaich (he): is gradually
David Schaich (he): spreading out and getting wider and wire
David Schaich (he): to going from
David Schaich (he): time of one up to larger times.
David Schaich (he): So the you know
David Schaich (he): interval
David Schaich (he): that contains a fixed amount of probability is
David Schaich (he): steadily growing. You may have
David Schaich (he): heard of. They're called one signal
David Schaich (he): intervals, and probability distributions of this sort
David Schaich (he): that corresponds to the range of which the distribution needs to be integrated, so that the overall probability
David Schaich (he): and it's up to roughly 68%.
David Schaich (he): That is. that interval
David Schaich (he): it's steadily growing as time goes on with this growth just related to
David Schaich (he): the diffusion constant for this random walk, which is
David Schaich (he): maximized at.
David Schaich (he): So that is
David Schaich (he): the way the probabilities for competing this walk many times of all.
David Schaich (he): As time passes they gradually spread out.
David Schaich (he): Hey!
David Schaich (he): I can now consider the opposite limits, where
David Schaich (he): there is
David Schaich (he): a much larger probability of stepping in one direction to the white
David Schaich (he): rather than the other direction. To the left the drift velocity
David Schaich (he): in this case
David Schaich (he): 2 P. Minus one is
David Schaich (he): 4.9 8, close to the maximum value
David Schaich (he): that it can have.
David Schaich (he): Well, you
David Schaich (he): refusing to cost them correspondingly. He is close to the lowest value that it can have. So it is 2 times the square root
David Schaich (he): of P.
David Schaich (he): Times. Q. So that's approximately one approximately one over 100, so they should be approximately to the square root of 100 is 2 tenths. Actual value is not quite that
David Schaich (he): 1.1 9 9. What we are seeing is.
David Schaich (he): it's on the ocean. Probability distribution now on a slightly different set of axes is no longer fixed with the starting point. It is
David Schaich (he): really
David Schaich (he): essentially a 100% probability, always larger than 0, always positive.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): expectation value for this option remains the point where the distribution is maximized
David Schaich (he): that is quickly riffing off to the
David Schaich (he): right with that velocity as and passes. And although we do have
David Schaich (he): the diffusion, the spreading out of this probability distribution
David Schaich (he): with time. the rate at which
David Schaich (he): the one Sigma interval.
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): any other interval that integrates to a fixed amount of probability. It grows.
David Schaich (he): It's smaller than we saw before.
David Schaich (he): due to the smaller fusion. Coefficients or diffusion costs
David Schaich (he): point 2 rather than one.
David Schaich (he): and then we can
David Schaich (he): look at the intermediate case between those 2 extremes
David Schaich (he): where P. And Q. Are not exactly equal.
David Schaich (he): 2 times point 6 minus one
David Schaich (he): is 4, point 2.
David Schaich (he): The diffusion constants is 2
David Schaich (he): of the point, 2 4, so that's the point you forward is roughly points 5
David Schaich (he): where a quarter is a half
David Schaich (he): that is
David Schaich (he): close t0 0ne comes out just below 1.9 8, so very close the maximum value for the fusion coefficient that we had
David Schaich (he): with P. Aq. Or equal. And now there is a slope drift to the right. At the same time. Yes, there is more pronounced.
David Schaich (he): the fusion or spreading out.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the probability distributions.
David Schaich (he): so it's slow drift with a relatively quick diffusion. and the more it will turn out to be
David Schaich (he): a more typical physical behavior. Is this
David Schaich (he): kind of diffusive behavior rather than
yeah.
David Schaich (he): very quick drift, without so much diffusion.
David Schaich (he): So getting back to
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): calculations that we had been doing so
David Schaich (he): through those examples of
David Schaich (he): vanishing large and small velocities, and the corresponding. if you
David Schaich (he): different values of those.
David Schaich (he): What we'll do now
David Schaich (he): too much focus
David Schaich (he): we can connect.
David Schaich (he): It's usually
David Schaich (he): to the central.
David Schaich (he): which we can recall.
David Schaich (he): He goes analytic expression for the probability distribution of the sum of many variables. In this case you can consider each random step in the war.
David Schaich (he): be one of those variables. The sum is that final position. X that we're interested in.
David Schaich (he): and the central limit 0
that we could emphasize
David Schaich (he): repeatedly, is believing the
David Schaich (he): overall behavior of that final position. X.
David Schaich (he): Just 2 properties of the individual step. In particular. It's mean view.
David Schaich (he): invariance. Sigma squared.
David Schaich (he): so that X is the same as the some you define when introducing
David Schaich (he): the central limit theorem in the 4 0f that
David Schaich (he): we care about, and this should be a good approximation
David Schaich (he): approaching inequality.
David Schaich (he): When the number of steps
David Schaich (he): that we have to
David Schaich (he): account for.
David Schaich (he): So what we want to do is to analyze
David Schaich (he): this probability distribution, or the file position.
David Schaich (he): Is that me and you.
David Schaich (he): Sigma Square.
David Schaich (he): how is that
David Schaich (he): single step process, the single variable
David Schaich (he): in the context of the
David Schaich (he): So given the
David Schaich (he): simple random walk, we have set up one dimension, probability. P. Is something we write and queue a step into the left.
David Schaich (he): Anyone read off the the mean every single step.
David Schaich (he): This to be
David Schaich (he): expectation value of one of these steps. X Sub. I. That get some double
David Schaich (he): for the walk as a whole.
David Schaich (he): recall the
David Schaich (he): definition of
David Schaich (he): expectation, value something over all possible outcomes
David Schaich (he): in our outcome space, the value of that outcome
David Schaich (he): corresponding probability. So this is maybe a bit subtle to come up with independently that the 2 0utcomes we have one is stepping to the right
she is.
David Schaich (he): Is that the platform?
David Schaich (he): I'm. Set t0 0ne without loss of generality. The probability of stepping to the right is P. And the other outcome, you have
David Schaich (he): step me to the left with that same fixed step. 5. I have this with probability 2
David Schaich (he): which is
David Schaich (he): one minus P. So that the probabilities add up t0 0ne
David Schaich (he): so plus p minus one minus P.
Gives us
David Schaich (he): 2 P. Minus one for
David Schaich (he): the main mute
David Schaich (he): of the probability distribution double David.
David Schaich (he): our simple random walk example.
David Schaich (he): and we can recognize
David Schaich (he): that for
no.
David Schaich (he): in the drift of what today. for the overall and a walk.
David Schaich (he): and in fact.
David Schaich (he): S0 2 P. Minus one is the encrypt velocity multiplied by that time interval, delta t
David Schaich (he): delta t itself is
David Schaich (he): yeah whole time divided by the number of steps. So
David Schaich (he): this mean from the single step underlying
David Schaich (he): are we able to walk?
Is yeah.
David Schaich (he): gift velocity.
David Schaich (he): Times
David Schaich (he): to you are in which is rearranged
David Schaich (he): like. So
David Schaich (he): there's a similar calculation to do
David Schaich (he): with the expected value of the square of each individual step where
David Schaich (he): it's the same definition of expectation that we always have
just have a.
David Schaich (he): Now X. I squared with my
David Schaich (he): each probability. and because
David Schaich (he): minus one squared and plus one squared are both one.
David Schaich (he): We get p plus Q. Which are defined to add up t0 0ne.
David Schaich (he): and we can immediately write down the variance of our single step.
David Schaich (he): It is that expectation value of the step squared.
David Schaich (he): one minus mu squared
David Schaich (he): Mu is 2 P. Minus one.
David Schaich (he): so we have one minus 4 P. Square. minus 2 p plus one
David Schaich (he): holding out an overall factor of that is a 4, a 2
David Schaich (he): or P squared minus 4 P. Plus one. The ones cancel. We have the overall factor of 4 P.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): with that negative sign out front.
David Schaich (he): What is left over is one minus
David Schaich (he): p, which is n0 2 surprisingly 4 P. Queue. the
David Schaich (he): same factor
David Schaich (he): that showed up in
David Schaich (he): the fluctuations of that total step length.
David Schaich (he): We're probably in the square of that diffusion constant
I can
David Schaich (he): you just right there at the square. The Diffusion Council is 4 Pq. Over delta t.
David Schaich (he): That delta t now is.
David Schaich (he): and the denominator is still t over m. We have.
David Schaich (he): or, in other words.
David Schaich (he): Sigma squared is
David Schaich (he): the diffusion. Constants d squared time to divided by
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): going to well. a new page and see what I can
David Schaich (he): on the projector. But just to
David Schaich (he): emphasize
David Schaich (he): one last thing.
David Schaich (he): so the results that we have found
David Schaich (he): the leading, the
David Schaich (he): mean of a single step in a random walk
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): the proof velocity Times time.
David Schaich (he): as well as relating the
David Schaich (he): period of Sigma squared
David Schaich (he): to the huge and constant squared. I've signed those relations
David Schaich (he): turned out to be general results for all well-behaved probability distributions with a
David Schaich (he): finite main and various
David Schaich (he): finite diffusion, coefficients and riff velocity
David Schaich (he): the particular factors of P. And Q.
David Schaich (he): That we came up with to establish. These relations, for this example.
David Schaich (he): are specific to
David Schaich (he): the simple one-dimensional fixed up, like
David Schaich (he): you know what
David Schaich (he): that we are considering. Those are not
David Schaich (he): generic or not, general.
David Schaich (he): If you believe that there is this
David Schaich (he): fairly reasonable relation between the need of each step, and how much end steps
David Schaich (he): drift in time, how much they diffuse
David Schaich (he): you, can
David Schaich (he): we? We rewrite the expression for
David Schaich (he): the central
David Schaich (he): that we had earlier in terms
David Schaich (he): how
David Schaich (he): the diffusion constants.
David Schaich (he): and the velocity
David Schaich (he): which we can
David Schaich (he): go back to
David Schaich (he): these examples and illustrations, and confirm what we were seeing earlier, with the algebraic expressions for trip velocity and diffusion.
David Schaich (he): that each of these curves is
David Schaich (he): a Gaussian probabilities. Distribution of this sort.
David Schaich (he): As time goes on the
David Schaich (he): the gauge, the exponential factor in the Gaussian is maximized
David Schaich (he): when this argument is 0,
because
David Schaich (he): all of the terms in it are
David Schaich (he): positive either to T
David Schaich (he): for square.
David Schaich (he): So the peak and the Gaussian
David Schaich (he): will be occurring.
David Schaich (he): X is equal to
David Schaich (he): velocity times time
so.
David Schaich (he): and similarly the
David Schaich (he): with that of their caution is going to
David Schaich (he): increase as time goes on.
David Schaich (he): Governed by this factor of 2D squared T. The diffusion constant squared, and the denominator.
David Schaich (he): so that to some factor is reducing the
David Schaich (he): size of the argument the exponential for a fixed numerator, if it's a distance
David Schaich (he): of the peak of the probability distribution. So that's
distance from the P. Has to increase in order to get a
David Schaich (he): fixed value of
David Schaich (he): the exponential factor that fixed with to that caption distribution.
David Schaich (he): and similarly because the
David Schaich (he): now she is spreading out, and it's with this becoming wider in order to it's this
David Schaich (he): no wise as he.
David Schaich (he): We'll be fine probability distribution that integrates t0 100%
David Schaich (he): that normalization factor
David Schaich (he): has to.
David Schaich (he): Again.
David Schaich (he): it decreases.
David Schaich (he): I mean that with the square root of this combination D squared on this team.
David Schaich (he): That is the rate at which the height of the peaks in the distribution are dropping
David Schaich (he): as they with increase, and
David Schaich (he): the walks that they describe
David Schaich (he): spread out
David Schaich (he): one last thing that we
David Schaich (he): we'll look at before turning to
David Schaich (he): statistical ensemble is
David Schaich (he): actually comparing They' a lot of the fusion
David Schaich (he): what we can expect as time goes on for
David Schaich (he): the drift of a random walk compared to
David Schaich (he): it's diffusion.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): assuming we have
David Schaich (he): the non 0 with velocity. Then the expected final position
of our walk is going to
David Schaich (he): very proportional to the time that the walk lasts.
David Schaich (he): whereas
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): diffusion length, Delta X. We saw a lot of the fusion is proportional to the square root of the T.
David Schaich (he): So, putting these together and looking at the relative fluctuations or the
David Schaich (he): scale of uncertainties around the expected final position.
David Schaich (he): You know it's proportional to
David Schaich (he): That's square
David Schaich (he): divided by team from Drift.
David Schaich (he): a factor of one over root T,
David Schaich (he): which is going to vanish
David Schaich (he): at large times
David Schaich (he): t going to infinity.
David Schaich (he): So there are to facts to keep in mind that although
David Schaich (he): the absolute. the fusion of each walk
David Schaich (he): he's always growing
David Schaich (he): proportional to
David Schaich (he): that square root t from the wall. Diffusion The you
David Schaich (he): relative uncertainty coming from this diffusion
David Schaich (he): scale of these
David Schaich (he): fluctuations.
David Schaich (he): the expected position. because
David Schaich (he): when compared to any knowledge or drift.
David Schaich (he): And this, again, is that very generic results which we can now
David Schaich (he): appreciate from having connected diffusion to probability distribution predicted by the central limit. Theorem
David Schaich (he): express now in terms of
David Schaich (he): the diffusion, coefficients, and grip velocity determined by
David Schaich (he): each single step in our random walk.
David Schaich (he): that really the the law of diffusion itself. It's my it's
David Schaich (he): fancy name as a physical wall is an equivalent statement to
David Schaich (he): the central
David Schaich (he): and in particular, the law of diffusion will hold
David Schaich (he): whenever the central limit theorem is applicable in the central limit for your own.
maybe.
David Schaich (he): can recall
David Schaich (he): only required
David Schaich (he): Assuming that
David Schaich (he): I mean
David Schaich (he): in variance of our single step process.
David Schaich (he): our finite.
David Schaich (he): So that is a
David Schaich (he): nice message to take away from
David Schaich (he): all of the
David Schaich (he): probability found that we've been going through starting from definitions of
David Schaich (he): probability, of the spaces building up to
David Schaich (he): of all large numbers, central to the If you're in dial, want to fusion. they are all closely connected.
David Schaich (he): and all behave as they should based on the
David Schaich (he): You know, the reasonable physical assumption that
David Schaich (he): the mean and the variance characterizing the probability space are finite. We will see an example of the computer project where
David Schaich (he): this assumption breaks down. and then. consequently so that some of all diffusion.
David Schaich (he): save that for tomorrow, though, and
David Schaich (he): for the last about 15min. moving on to the next major topic of statistical ensembles.
David Schaich (he): dynamic equilibrium and entropy. Before moving on, just one call for
David Schaich (he): any questions. infusions, or all of curiosity about
David Schaich (he): these central probability topics.
David Schaich (he): I'm not saying you, which is reasonable. Given that.
David Schaich (he): like a lot of these topics we've been looking at so far.
David Schaich (he): Actually one in the particular form for us to use for the remainder module are
David Schaich (he): reasonably familiar in things that you've probably seen before, possibly many times.
David Schaich (he): We're now going to
David Schaich (he): look at more specialized
David Schaich (he): statistical physics subjects
David Schaich (he): that's start to the column less familiar.
David Schaich (he): beginning with
David Schaich (he): beginning with the concept of
David Schaich (he): a statistical on.
David Schaich (he): So we
David Schaich (he): general idea that you will now have in mind is to
David Schaich (he): apply the probability foundations that we have looked at to
David Schaich (he): the State system. Many particles.
yes.
David Schaich (he): are revolving in time
David Schaich (he): subject to
David Schaich (he): some cause, some constraints
David Schaich (he): which will be
David Schaich (he): specify it shortly
David Schaich (he): personal. This observation is
David Schaich (he): going to connect to
David Schaich (he): our experiment in the language of probability, that we looked at last week. and
David Schaich (he): each time we repeat this experiment, and observing these many particles at different points of time.
David Schaich (he): You will get
okay
David Schaich (he): states of that system.
David Schaich (he): Make up all of you. I'll make a J.
David Schaich (he): At each time.
David Schaich (he): Let me choose to look at it
David Schaich (he): and T. J.
David Schaich (he): And to make this general idea
David Schaich (he): a bit more concrete.
and
David Schaich (he): provide some simple examples to work through. As we encounter these concepts
David Schaich (he): introduce.
hey?
David Schaich (he): Another simple but
David Schaich (he): powerful, highly- thinkable and still widely used Example.
David Schaich (he): what is known as expense system where our particles.
David Schaich (he): and more generally our degrees of freedom
David Schaich (he): are just spins
David Schaich (he): that point up
David Schaich (he): like. So
David Schaich (he): we're down.
David Schaich (he): So the mathematics that these governing these systems is going to get us back to
David Schaich (he): simple example for flipping coins there only 2 possibilities for each particle in the system.
David Schaich (he): But physically this is applicable to
David Schaich (he): many different contexts. The original one, from roughly a 100 years ago. was the consideration of
David Schaich (he): magnetic molecules
David Schaich (he): where
yeah
David Schaich (he): molecules have some magnetic dipole.
David Schaich (he): and they want to use probability to predict the behavior of large numbers of these
David Schaich (he): molecules. In some system
David Schaich (he): you will
David Schaich (he): look at these examples throughout the module, including
David Schaich (he): I'm. Using these as a way to introduce interactions with the easy model later in term.
David Schaich (he): So that is something to look forward to. That's just you.
Okay.
David Schaich (he): How pretty example we have
David Schaich (he): some number of
we have
David Schaich (he): n equals 8
David Schaich (he): spins is fixed in
David Schaich (he): one dimension.
David Schaich (he): Hey, you representative configuration of those inequality spins
look like
David Schaich (he): this
David Schaich (he): collection of 8
David Schaich (he): particles, 8 degrees of freedom, pointing either up for down.
David Schaich (he): And do you? Well number all such configurations, is actually
David Schaich (he): the same as the total number of random walks we considered earlier today. So ask me about that again. We have 2 possibilities
David Schaich (he): for each of the end spins in the system in this case to the 8 is 200 56.
David Schaich (he): And now, proceeding through
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): additional probability concepts that we have
David Schaich (he): introduced.
David Schaich (he): we can think about
David Schaich (he): some of the measurements
David Schaich (he): that we could do to the States or the configurations of the spin system.
David Schaich (he): and if we were to
David Schaich (he): measure.
David Schaich (he): see the number of spins
David Schaich (he): for all of those 256
David Schaich (he): configurations. you would always get the same result.
David Schaich (he): There are always
David Schaich (he): it spins there, which
David Schaich (he): is obvious, but is also a example of you, so called conserved quantity.
David Schaich (he): something that is always the same.
David Schaich (he): Some measurements actually specify that always comes out the same for all of the States
David Schaich (he): in the system.
David Schaich (he): So maybe another example that is less trivial than the number of spins that we
David Schaich (he): fixed by.
David Schaich (he): I. Fiat is
David Schaich (he): whole energy.
David Schaich (he): What I should call you all internal energy
David Schaich (he): of isolated system
David Schaich (he): sometimes also call
David Schaich (he): a closed system, or in the sense that
David Schaich (he): it is not able to
David Schaich (he): exchange any energy with its surroundings and internal energy, in the sense that
David Schaich (he): the energy we're interested in is intrinsic to
David Schaich (he): the particles of the we use the freedom in this system.
David Schaich (he): and as account, for example, it doesn't depend on, say, the speed with which an observer is seeing the system itself go by
David Schaich (he): on the train.
David Schaich (he): Internal energy in that context it's the energy of the system in its overall rest. Space Observer. In the same inertial frame has that system. So
David Schaich (he): we know that energy is conserved. The energy of some states like I. It's the same as the other States.
David Schaich (he): Well overseas I. J.
David Schaich (he): And because this was first observing empirically many hundreds of years ago. back, before
David Schaich (he): statistical physics existed, he was put on a cell mathematical foundation.
So
David Schaich (he): this is first
David Schaich (he): observed it purely that
David Schaich (he): energy is conserved. and it was dug back in those days.
The
David Schaich (he): first of all.
David Schaich (he): i'll throw it at the Mx.
David Schaich (he): Which is something of a grand Us name for.
Hey, you
David Schaich (he): phenomenon that is now familiar to us, and mathematically can also be proven
David Schaich (he): rigorous land
David Schaich (he): through the first 0 0f any neuter.
David Schaich (he): All right; for now, since that was
David Schaich (he): approved over a 100 years ago, in the early 19 hundreds.
David Schaich (he): It holds, at least in flat space time. where conservation of energy is related to the invariance of systems as time.
David Schaich (he): and you also they to be able to.
David Schaich (he): You Never wise this to an equivalent statement.
David Schaich (he): That's if we relax
David Schaich (he): our
David Schaich (he): statements or assumption that our system of interest is closed or isolated.
David Schaich (he): That's
David Schaich (he): we allow it to change its internal energy.
David Schaich (he): maybe changing the internal energy of
David Schaich (he): i'm getting a system omega the same character. I think we've let our use for the overall outcome space.
David Schaich (he): Such a change must in fly.
David Schaich (he): and the opposite change.
Oh.
David Schaich (he): to the energy!
David Schaich (he): I'll see you surroundings
David Schaich (he): of this system.
David Schaich (he): so energy is still conserved, but eventually allowed to be exchanged in between
David Schaich (he): our system and its surroundings. That will be another
David Schaich (he): avatar of that first law of thermodynamics, the conservation of energy.
David Schaich (he): and given the to that is where
David Schaich (he): we will wrap up today. It will be
David Schaich (he): interesting things to say about
David Schaich (he): energy. It's conservation, and the
David Schaich (he): statistical ensemble that
we
David Schaich (he): obtain when it poses the constraints
David Schaich (he): that the energy is conserved and not allowed to be exchanged with the surroundings
David Schaich (he): that will no wait. That will wait till next week.
David Schaich (he): Once we have that computer liable tomorrow. So I don't, too.
David Schaich (he): See you then, and just ask for any final questions before
David Schaich (he): closing down the recording. winding up for this morning.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any. Take care, I hope you have a
David Schaich (he): good rest of the day. See you tomorrow.
David Schaich (he): You are welcome.